What are Data Structures?

Data Structure is a storage that is used to store and organise data.
It is a way of arranging data on a computer so that it can be accessed and updated efficiently.
Depending on the requirement and project, it is important to choose the right data structure for your project.

Data Structure Types:
1. Linear Data Structure: Array, Stack, Queue, Linked List.
2. Non-Linear Data Structure: Graph, Tree.


Linear Data Structure
    Elements are arrange/stored in a sequential manner ie one after the other.
    Since elements are arranged in particular order, they are easy to implement.

    When complexity increases, these are might be not the best choice becoz of operational complexity


1. Array Data Structure:
    - elements in memory are arranged in a continuos memory.
    - All the elements of the array are of the same type.
    - type is determined by the programming language.

2. Stack Data Structure:
    - elements are stored in LIFO principle. Last element stored in a stack will be removed first.


3. Queue Data Structure:
    - elements are stored in FIFO principle. First element stored in a queue will be removed first.

4. Linked List Data Structure:
    - elements are connected through a series of nodes.
    - each node contains the data items and address of the next node.



Non-Linear Data Structure
    Elements are arranged in a heirarchial manner, where one element is connected to on or more elements.


1. Graph Data Structure:
    - each node is called vertex, and each vertex is connected to other vertex through edges

    Popular Graph Based Data Structures:
        Spanning Tree and Minimum Spanning Tree
        Strongly Connected Components
        Adjacency Matrix
        Adjacency List

2. Tree Data Structure:
    - a tree is also a collection of vertices and edges. But there can be only one edge between two vertices

    Popular Tree based Data Structure
        Binary Tree
        Binary Search Tree
        AVL Tree
        B-Tree
        B+ Tree
        Red-Black Tree
